3/25/2026

PROJECT CONTEXT
This document provides context, background and instructions for agentic coding assistance for the Kenai River Baseline Water Quality Monitoring Project Comprehensive Report.

This water quality monitoring project is intended to identify water quality trends and issues that may be of management concern for fish, aquatic wildlife, terrestrial wildlife, and people in the Kenai River and its tributaries.

The project home web page is located at https://www.kenaiwatershed.org/kenai-river-baseline-water-quality-monitoring/. The agent should at least once a year inspect this page and its links to update relevant content and context.

I have placed important project documents for this project in the agent_context folder including:

- Current Quality Assurance Project Plan
- Current Memorandum of Understanding
- The successful proposal for the funding source for this project (Bureau of Reclamation)
- Previously completed comprehensive reports from 2016 and 2007. (This Quarto book project is intended to roughly mimic the format)
- Alaska Dept of Environmental Conservation Water Quality Standards (18 AAC 70)
- DL, LOD, LOQ Interpretation - from SGS Laboratories

DATA MANAGEMENT NOTES
The initial structure of this project was developed by a not very experienced coder. It has various features that will need correction or improvement initially. If we should consider revising the entire architecture initially (e.g. how the whole project is organized or formatted), suggest this at the outset.

In its ideal set-up, this project will intake data directly from the EPA central data exchange and integrate it as part of this Quarto Book, whenever the project is freshly rendered.

The "Appendix A" document in this project here is intended to be a included as an example demonstration of how data qa/qc and data management is handled. A separate Posit project, whose repository is at https://github.com/Kenai-Watershed-Forum/kenai-river-wqx-qaqc, is intended to handle the annual data QA/QC and management for each year. Once the procedure for Appendix A is well-developed and smooth, the plan is to reproduce that procedure for each year that has annual dataset. The annual data-handling qa/qc script should follow best practices as recommended by the Alaska Dept of Environmental Conservation and the Environmental Protection Agency. The goal of that pipeline in appendix A is:

1) Intake raw data
2) Apply QA/QC standards
3) Identify and flag data that does not meet QA/QCC standards
4) Upload data to the EPA central data exchange

Note that in future years, we may have different or additional partner laboratories. We may also be working with external partners on QA/QC review. Thus I wand the code to be flexible enough to include new laboratories, clearly written, and well documented.

Ultimately, I want all Kenai Watershed Forum data in the EPA CDX to be accessible in the EPA "How's My Waterway" app. Both our new and old data in the EPA CDX should be able to be visible in this interactive online map.

NOTES ON RAW DATA
In general, raw data sources for laboratories located in this project at other/input is untouched. As in, we received the data as-is from the lab.

PACKAGES NOTES
There are a variety of R packages developed by federal agencies that are intended to assist with the needs of this project, such as dataRetrieval, TADA, and others. We want to integrate these packages as appropriate and as recommended.

INLINE CODE NOTES
Each chapter about a water quality parameter will contain sentences describing summary statistics (min/max, range, etc). In this Quarto Book, I want these values to updated using inline code whenever the project is freshly rendered.

QUARTO NOTES
I want this project to be able to be rendered as both .html (hosted on GitHub Pages) or as a docx. I want the reader to be able to access and download the docx. It does not need to be render-able from Quarto as a PDF.

OTHER MISCELLANEOUS NOTES
- Appendix A and its associated source materials contain various references to "AWQWMS", few  sometimes also written as "aqwms" or similar. This acronym " is for "ambient water quality monitoring system," which is software sold by Gold Systems. In 2021 we had considered using this software but eventually decided not to. I would like to edit the document to no longer use this acronym and instead use something more generalized. Whatever convention for similar project might be.

- One eventual goal of this work is to make decisions about if sampling plans and sampling designs should change for ongoing long-term monitoring. Some example questions may include: 1) Are there parameters we should be monitoring for that we are not yet? 2) Are there parameters we no longer need to monitor as much or at all? Would it be useful or feasible to change monitoring plans so that it is performed by a single team over multiple days rather than multiple teams over the course of a few hours? 4) Are there places/times/parameters that would be more effectively monitored by logger devices as opposed to grab samples and synoptic measurements? 

WISH LIST ITEMS
A) I would like for all boxplot figures displaying data to be interactive. When the user hovers their mouse over, the point has a pop-up window with relevant information
B) I would like the figures to be able to display data in two ways: 1) Show all data that passed QA/QC standards, and 2) Show all data even if it did not pass QA/QC standards. The user would be able to click on a toggle switch or box to change back and forth between the two views, and the symbology would be different for both types of data


NOTE ON AGENTIC COLLABORATION STANDARDS
I will use agentic coding assistance to develop and complete this project. However, I do not want to create and implement code without first understanding how it works. The ability for future scientists to be able to read, edit, and apply the code in this project is important, as it is a long-term monitoring project. Therefore, the agent will proceed with implementing code edits only after confirming with the user that they understand what is happening.